It's a great honour and  privilege for all of us to pay our respects to Her Holiness Mata Nirmala Devi ji
I have brought my children,
Aman, the elder son,    Ayan  the younger one,
for Her blessings and good wishes from all of you.
This is the first time they have
come to perform in Maharashtra.
It's a very difficult time for classical music
especially for children to continue
their studies, go to school
and also practice and do sadhana.
Only blessings of great people can help
and we believe in blessings, good wishes.
No sadhana can be successful without the blessings.
This is the time everybody is after short cuts.
Nobody wants to go long way,
but knowingly with our full awareness
we have chosen the long way.
This is tradition.
And this is what Mataji's trying to teach all of us.
And show that how rich culture of India, India has.
So this is the seventh generation in my family who
are carrying on this tradition of sarod playing.
And Safad Hussain Sahab is on the Tabla.
He also represents... he comes from a family of musicians
and he is very ambulant and very
popular in India and abroad.
So we'll begin our recital with a Raag Yaman.
Very beautiful raag, traditional raag
and Yaman we'll play all of us together.
And after that, maybe if Mataji orders me,
then I'll play a short solo piece also.
A very musical name she has Shruti.
Micro tone!
A very important part of music, Shruti!
I would like to introduce, we have great film
maker among us, Shri Gulzar Sahab with us today
Mataji, Gulzar Sahab is making a
film on Bhimsen Joshi these days.
And he has made one film on me, last year by Films Division.
Some of you must be seeing me filing my nails.
I would like to clarify that I have to
press the strings with the edge of my nails
and that is why, every time I have
to file to equalise the grooves.
But many people feel perhaps I press
the strings with the finger tips.
I'll show you the sound of finger tip.
Now with the nails.
Wow!
Thank you very much.
I'm honoured. It's my privilege and honour to
present our humble music before Her Holiness.
I will conclude the recital with
a bhajan, which is based on Khamaj
and later on Gara. You will all recognise
very, internationally, popular bhajan.
This is vibrated pani I am giving you.
उसमे वाइब्रटेड पानी दे देना. आप पहनिएगा ज़रूर. आशीर्वाद. बहुत बड़िया बच्चे हैं. वाह वाह वाह क्या कहने.
Give vibrated water in it. Please do wear it. They are very nice children. Wow wow wow what to say!
Please be seated.
It was really such a unique day and such a performance.
Words really are not sufficient to describe our joy,
but as you are singing today about 'anand vihari'
I saw all of you becoming ananda viharis absolutely.
Now we have before us such a great artist.
His name is, you know Ustad Amjad Ali Khan Sahab
but have you seen the word Ali there?
Perhaps you do not know that we
worship Ali and Fatima Bi in a puja.
There’s a regular puja for them because,
to us, they are Brahamadeva itself
and that’s why you will find among these Shia
people, who have got such a talent of expression.
In the Quran, I am sorry to say that
Mohammed Sahab was tortured so much
and also later on, as you know, Hassan
and Hussein were killed in Karbella,
they had no time to talk about the universal nature.
But such a great book is this Quran.
We have written now some
sort of a commentary on that
and it’s obvious, that he was the
incarnation of the primordial master,
though he was so humble, he was so much worried
that he should not be called as divine because
people will again start doing all kinds of ritualism.
But now you can see, especially on tabla.
Left side of a musalman is always very strong.
मानी हुई बात है.
It is a well known fact.
This is  the blessing of that
great incarnation of Ali.
Brahamadeva incarnated only twice.
One was Ali, who was not understood even
by the followers from Mohammad Sahab.
It’s always so.
But we know who he is and we worship him.
हमारे यहाँ रेग्युलर पूजा होती है उनकी. एक पूजा में से उनकी एक पूजा है.
We regularly have His pooja here.
It is one of the poojas done
and by taking his name we have
cured many diabetic patients.
But before that we have to be
connected with that divine power.
Now I see two great saints
sitting next to Amjad Ali Sahab.
They are really saints, born
realised. You can see that.
Otherwise at this young age, they cannot
be so deft. They cannot be you see.
Such understanding, rapport
and deftness from last life!
Might be they might have been with Tansen or
someone I don’t know, but really they are prodigies
And such prodigies are now born to great artists
is also the blessing of the Divine I think.
You choose your parents no doubt.
But they should be born to such great artist, itself
it shows their own choice and they are saints.
I am happy they have come to Maharashtra
because you know Maharashtrians
are absolutely drowned into music.
We had saints and saints and musicians
saints, all kinds of things,
but we had no saints yet
who had playing sarod.
So such beautiful things you see
nowadays happening in this world,
that these great people are taking birth
in the families of great artists
because they know the value of this art,
of this great, classical music art.
You also now realise. I know
because now you are realised souls
and you understand it and you
don’t like cheap type music.
But see their dignity, their style and everything!
Of course I always felt Amjad
Ali was like my son. Always!
He is Khan Sahab, he
is a big man I know,
but I always felt that kind of a feeling
for him because he has that humility.
With all that art, with all that
creativity, he is so humble.
He is not at all conscious of his own achievements at all.
I give really a great credit to
him and to his two children also.
You know how difficult it is for me
to be your mother and your guru.
It is a very difficult situation.
In the same way a father being
your guru is very difficult,
especially for such a music
which requires complete तपश्चर्या
complete dedication and complete respect of your guru.
When he is your father,
it’s very difficult. I don’t know how
things are being managed by these children
and how they have imbibed these things
and such respect for their father.
Because they see what art he has.
I feel a great vision is
before Me of this great music
and through music you have seen the chaitanya,
the vibrations are carried everywhere.
So how far can you think of the dimensions in
which all this beautiful, divine music will spread.
I invite also Ustad Amjad Ali Khan
Sahab  to my house in Cabella.
I am not such a rich person.
I won’t be able to really give you support you,
the way I would like to support all the artists.
By all the audience, I always say they
have got the blessings of the Saraswati,
but you must look after their Lakshmi side.
But I am not so well off I should say.
Whatever is possible, I would try
to look after, especially there.
We need your blessings, your love.
आइए तो सही. देखिए आपका घर है बच्चों को भी ले आइए.
Please do come. It’s your own home. Get children also.
With what meditative mood he was singing,
just think and he put you into meditation.
Of course Yaman raga  is a
very simple, beautiful raga,
but the way he played and his
children. I must say this
I’ve never heard such Yaman raga
before. Never heard. I must confess.
I must... I am the oldest, oldest woman here.
I have heard all kinds of people all my life,
but never such good Yaman raga I have heard.
It’s such a...  you see trigun,
because it was not jugalbandi but
three persons trigunamika was playing.
With such poise, such dignity, such beauty!
You all have enjoyed.
I don’t know how to thank Amjad Ali Sahab
for coming himself and bringing
his children to give us this joy.
Also the raga Darbari  Kanada,
which you all appreciate very much and enjoy. But
I think you really got lost with him completely.
It was very meditative, very, very meditative and
I think all your thoughts had stopped completely.
You had reached a state of nirvichara.
I also, was in another world of music.
Then the khamaj and the bhajan which was
the favourite song of Mahatma Gandhi.
Unfortunately Mahatma Gandhi never knew how
to play any sarod nor he knew how to sing.
You know I have been with him
as a child for years together.
But such an interesting person he was
that he could immediately make out
if somebody was making any mistakes
in the tala or in the swaras.
Surprisingly, he never knew Indian
music, but he had that spirit within him.
Immediately he used to say, this is
wrong and he respected music very much.
Very much he respected music and in his music he.......
you know that very well that his भजानवली “list
of hymns” was selected by me quite a lot,
especially the first prayers of his.
He used to ask me,
though he was a realised soul, he used
people who were of very mundane type,
very ordinary, materialistic people
for the freedom of this country.
I don’t know, he was
like some sort of a पारस पत्थर as they say
who just touches something becomes gold.
He was that kind of a leader, who gave us such a
great idea of सर्वधर्म स्मानत्व (all religions equal)
But more than that is in Sahaja Yoga.
We do not feel that all dharma’s are
equal, but we worship all of them.
इबादत करते हैं सबके.
We worship all.
All of them because they were all great people
born on the tree of life as beautiful flowers.
Now you pluck them and the
dead flowers you fight,
but they worked only for divinity
and spirituality and nothing else.
How could they work for anything else?
But we have, as human beings, always
tried to make a mess of everything.
But Sahaja Yoga – all the
Sahaja Yogis worship them
and this is the difference.
Just feeling the same way about
say Hindu, Muslims and all that
is different from to worship Mohammed
Sahab, as well as Shri Rama, or Shri Krishna.
It’s much deeper, because we know they are all one.
They said the same thing.
They never wanted to create problems like this
and in the music you find
you forget all your differences, your
so-called brands, your countries, nations.
Now you won’t believe there are
55 nations sitting before you.
Fifty five nations.
We have Muslims from Iran, from Algeria, from Tunisia.
Also there are so many of them, who are
now absolutely achieved a state of Sufis.
We respect and worship all the great saints.
In India also we had a very big movement
I should say of the great saints.
As निज़ामुद्दीन ख़ान साहब You know that Nizamuddin was  another realised soul, Chishti  where they sing in the qawallis.
They've  never... how could Mohammad Sahab
say that you should not have
music? How is it possible?
How can it be?
It’s absolutely wrong, impossible.
there’s not much of a difference
between “Vaishnavajana” and the sufis.
They are just the same.
How could he say such a thing and how
could Christ say that you can have wine?
All this is some sort of a manipulation I think.
Is impossible. Music is divine.
Of course cheap type music would be very different.
But without music, how are
you going to worship God?
How are you going to feel Him?
Only at the time of meditation you can be silent.
But this music, that you have heard today, has
shown you how we were all tied in one sutra;
into one beautiful feeling of one-ness.
So many countries are here.
They have never learnt any classical music.
They don’t know any ragas. They
don’t know any talas. Nothing!
But the way they appreciate you’ll be surprised,
it’s only because now they have become the spirit.
रूह बन गयी. They are रूह (spirit) now.
और रूहानी ज़िंदगी में संगीत का बड़ा कार्य है
And music has a great role in spiritual life,
इसीलिए मैं इसको बहुत ज़्यादा जितना भी हो सकता है उतना चाहती हूँ की उसे प्रोत्साहन हो उसको प्रमोट करूँ उसको आगे  बड़ाऊ जितना मुझसे बन पड़ता है.
that’s why I want to support it as much as possible, encourage it, promote it, promote it as much as I can.
क्योंकि दूसरा बड़ा भारी काम मुझे करना है की अनेक लोगों को उस परमात्मा की शक्ति से एकाकारिता दें.
Because I have to do another big heavy work to give unity to many people with the power of God.
लेकिन ये भी एक संगीत माध्यम् बन गया और जब अमज़द अली साहब जैसे लोग हैं और सफ़ाद हुसैन जैसे ताल्बध्ध लोग हैं तो कुछ मुश्किल नही होगा.
But this also became a musical medium and when there are people like Amjad Ali sahab and rhythmic people like Safad Hussain, then nothing will be difficult.
मैं तो हर बार देखती हूँ की ये नये नये मुखड़े पता नही कहाँ से ले आते हैं हर बार कभी इन्होने रिपीट नही किये. जीतने बार भी सुनिये नये ही मुखड़े बजा लेते हैं पता नही कैसे.
I see every time that I don’t know from where they get these new choruses, they have never repeated them every time.
सब चीज़ें इतनी सुंदर हैं इतनी दैवीय और इतनी आनंद दाई हैं की उनका वर्णन तो नही किया जा सकता
Everything is so beautiful, so divine and so blissful that it cannot be described,
लेकिन हमारे सहजयोग में हर योगी के हृदय में आप सब artist के लिए नितांत श्रद्धा और आपको सब बहुत प्रेम और आदर से देखते हैं.
but in our Sahaja Yoga, every yogi has a lot of reverence for all of you artists and looks at you all with great love and respect.
इसकी ये वजह नही की मेरे ही कारण है इसकी ये भी वजह है की जानते हैं की इनके गाने से हमारी जो अंदर शक्तियाँ है वो दैविक हो जाती है
The reason for this is not because it is because of me, it is also because we know that by singing his songs, our inner powers become divine.
इन लोग का नूर ही बदल गया
The light [Aura/divine light] of these people has changed,
मैं तो कहती हू इनके genetics बदल गए सबके और ये चीज़ में जो भी हुआ है जो भी घटित हुआ है जो भी चीज़ बन पड़ी है उसमे आप कलाकारो का बड़ा भारी हाथ है.
I can say that their genetics have changed and you artists have a big hand in whatever has happened, whatever has happened.
इसलिए मैं आपको बहुत धन्यवाद देती हू इसके लिए.
That’s why I thank you very much for this.
Want to say something now Rajesh?
Gregoire?
ये कहीं से टोपियाँ लेके आए हैं आपको खुश करने के लिए.
They have got caps from somewhere to please you.
You are not supposed to wear topis
in front of such great artists.
उतारलीजिए. Please remove.
Shri Mataji it’s very difficult
to use words after music
and it’s very difficult to use
words after you have spoken.
We heard many performances of great musicians, but
as soon as these great artists came in, we
felt that we would be in your दरबार at home
with someone who would play with the strings
of our heart and that’s what happened.
We were I don’t know where Shri Mataji.
Certainly in joy!
We were feeling the closeness.
We were proud of him as if we
were his children or his family.
This is strange to have such a
feeling for someone one has never met.
We all see so very much and enjoy the joyful
and buoyant performance of the tabla player
who was sending notes of merriness and joy
and we were very impressed by
the children of the great artist.
Shri Mataji, on behalf of all the Sahajis of all
the world I would like also to thank Rajesh Shah,
who has provided us the opportunity
to see you so pleased Shri Mataji,
because this is what we have enjoyed.
So, in so many words, thank you very much
for an exceptional evening. Thank you.
Here is something small from you all to them.
ये इन लोगों ने कुछ आपके लिए इंतज़ामात किए हुए हैं.
These people have made some arrangements for you.
इसको मान लीजिए थोड़ी सी चीज़ सब को मिलकरके जो कुछ हो पाया.
Consider it a small thing, whatever was possible by working together.
अभी दस दिन हर रोज़ रात को एक एक आर्टिस्ट आते रहे.
Now for ten days, every night let one artist come.
तो हमारे बात को आप टालिएगा नहीं.
Please do come.
आपको आना होगा कबेला
You have to come to Cabella
और वहाँ पर एक बहुत ऊपर में ऐसी जगह बनी है कि वहाँ बैठ करके आप बस गाते ही रहिए या बजाते ही रहिए.
and there is such a place at the very top that you just keep on singing or playing while sitting there.
बहुत सुंदर जगह. एकदम शांत नीरव जगह.
Very beautiful place. Very quiet place.
आप तो आ चुके हैं, आपने ऊपर की जगह देखी है हमारी?
You have come, have you seen our place above?
इतमीनान से आइए और रहिए आपकी माँ का घर है आराम से बच्चों को भी ले आइए.
Come and stay in peace, it is your mother’s house, get your children.
हाँ ज़रूर इनके लिए तो हमने खास चीज़ कही है की ये हमारी साड़ी ज़रूर पहनेंगी. अच्छा?  इनमें तो इतना फ़रक अगया है बाप रे. बहुत खुश.
Yes. Please. We have asked her for a special thing, please do wear this saree. You have changed so much. Very pleased.
माताजी आपका इज़ाज़त हो तो मैं,
I would like to say a few words.
On behalf of Mataji, when Pragya Srivastav rang us up
she wrote a formal letter and since I
deal with Khan Sahab’s correspondence
I just said in a normal way I started writing
since Mataji said about Lakshmi and Saraswati
I have to mention this to you.
I wrote that Lakshmi part of it.
Then she wrote saying Mataji is going
to be here and this is a संस्था
I said you asked me that’s why I wrote. I
didn’t say you have to do anything for us.
We just need your blessings
and I humbly requested to Pragya
ji and told her I’ll be very happy.
We both will be really honoured and
blessed if Mataji bless the children.
So this is the first time we plan to
bring mainly because of You Mataji.
May God Bless.
and the children and fourteen years
ago when I was with Khan Sahab,
marrying a handsome man and marrying an artist, who is loved by all was a very difficult job for me to face the world
and I did not know marrying
a musician where I ended.
And I was very disturbed when I went to
Mataji and I literally started crying.
She took me to a room and sat with Her.  She blessed me.
Ever since then I don’t think I have
ever looked back with Her blessings. And...
And she has cooled down since then.
Art and culture I think without the love of people, the listeners and of course the blessings of people like Mataji and God it cannot be music.
So I think with all Your blessings and all your
blessings Mataji, may it flourish more and more.
May God bless you. May God bless you.
इन लोगों ने इंतज़ाम किया है आपके लिए मेरा कोई इंतज़ाम नहीं है.
These people have organised it for you, I have not done anything.
इसको बड़ाते जाइएएगा. इस पानी को बड़ाते जाईएगा.
Please take this vibrated water. Keep increasing it.
तीन डॉक्टर ओं को देल्ही में MD मिल गया है सहज योग मे. बिमरिया ठीक कर दी. Dr Rai आए हुए हैं यहाँ पर.
3 Doctors have got MD in Sahaja Yoga. They have treated diseases. Dr Rai is here.
इन्होने अभी किताब लिखी हुई है. यहाँ पर बैठे हैं.
He has written a book. He is sitting here.
कभी कभी शराब जैसी टेस्ट आजाती है. कोई हर्ज़ नहीं.
It tastes like wine sometimes. Doesn’t matter.
This is what happened when Christ vibrated the
water. It became... tasted like the grape juice.
But they said it was wine.
But this is the word used in
Hebrew, wine for a grape juice.
How can you make wine in one
minute, instantaneously?
It has to ferment. It has to rot. It has to become
absolutely rotten, otherwise it’s not wine.
So this is such a misunderstanding.
That’s why Mohammed Sahab had
to say it again and again.
इसको माना कर दिया. उस व्क़त नहीं थी तो नानक साहब ने कहाँ मत पियो. कोई अच्छी चीज़ें थोड़ी हैं.
Nanak Sahab also said the same. It is not a good thing
Mataji, मोहम्मद साहब को अज़ान सुनने का बड़ा शौक था.
Mohammad Sahib was very fond of listening to Azan.
किसका?
Of what?
अज़ान जो देते हैं.
Azan
हाँ.
Yes
ऐसे सुर में अज़ान देते थे.
He used to give Azaan in such a tone
उन्होने जितना आपका नमाज़ है, वो नमाज़ क्या चीज़ है मालूम है आपको?
Do you know what Namaaz  is?
कुण्डलिनी का जागरण. हमारे यहाँ तो मंत्र है अल्लाह हो अकबर.
Awakening of Kundalini. Our mantra here is Allah Ho Akbar.
उसके बगैर गला नहीं ठीक होगा.
Throat will not heal without it.
आप ये बात समझ लीजिए की कहाँ मोहम्मद साहब हैं और कहाँ सब लोग हैं और कैसे इनकी रिश्तेदारी है और हम लोग बेकार ही में परेशान हो रहे हैं.
You should understand where Mohammad Sahab is and where all the people are and how are they related and we are unnecessarily getting worried.
अब ये लोग बैठ ही गए ना उसपे. ये समझने की चीज़ है. और आप लोग पहले समझ सकते हो क्योंकि आप लोग आर्टिस्ट है
Now these people have sat on it, haven’t they? It is something to be understood. And you can understand first because you are artists.
You must explain to them ?
आप लोग किसी दिन जा करके. आप दिल्ली में रहते हैं ना?
You go someday. You live in Delhi don’t you?
हाँ, Dr साहब आप कभी जा करके समझाइये क्या चीज़ है.
Yes, Dr sir, you go sometime and explain what it is.
इसको इतनी गहराई से आप जान जाइएगा और असलियत में की ये tangible है. आप महसूस कर सकते हैं.
You will know it so deeply and in reality
that it is tangible. You can feel.
अब उन्होने कहा ना “वैष्णव जन तो तेने कहिये “
Now he said, “Vaishnav jan to tene kahiye”.
अब ये सब वैष्णव हैं क्योंकि central path से ये सब उठे हुए हैं.
Now all these are Vaishnavas because they all have risen from the central path.
इस्लिये वैष्णव हैं ये सब. और “जो पीर पराई जाने रे” अब पीर पराई ये लोग दिमाग़ से नही जानते, उंगलियों के इशारे पे.
That's why all of them are Vaishnavas. And “Jo pir parai jaane re” Now these people don’t know about “ peer parayi” not by their mind, on the their fingers
सारा diagnosis उंगलियों पे होता है.
All the diagnosis is done on the fingers.
इसके लिए doctor के पास जाने की ज़रूरत नही, कुछ नही उंगलियों पे बता सकते हैं किसका क्या चक्र पकड़ा है.
There is no need to go to the doctor for this. Everything can be told on the fingers which chakra has been caught.
किसका नहीं पकड़ा है. कौन realised soul है कौन नही.
Whose has not been caught. Who is a realised soul and who is not.
ठगा नही सकते क्योंकि वहाँ पहुच गये हैं जहाँ absolute truth है अब इनको कोई ठगा नहीं सकता.
Can’t cheat because they have reached the place where there is absolute truth, now no one can cheat them.
और इस दशा में चाहती हूँ की अपने देश के मुसलमान आजाएँ.
And in this situation, I want the Muslims of our country to come.
एक तो मुझे कभी कभी रोना आता है देखके बहुत ग़रीबी  में बहुत परेशानी में इतने सालों से है.
Firstly, I feel like crying sometimes seeing that they have been in a lot of trouble in poverty for so many years.
उनको किसी तरह से वो स्थान मिला ही नही जो मिलना चाहिए था.
Somehow they did not get the place which they should have got.
कितने सारे आर्टिस्ट हैं जिनको मैं जानती हूँ जो बहुत परेशानी मे है.
There are so many artists whom I know who are in distress.
उसकी वजह ये ही है की हर समय अलग अलग हटाते गये हटाते गये.
The reason for this is that all the time they kept on saying you are separate.
तुम कोई दूसरे, तुम कोई दूसरे.
You someone else, you someone else.
इसीलये सारी परेशानियाँ है और ग़रीबी इस कदर है की मैं तो देख नही सकती.
That’s why there are so many problems and poverty is so much that I can’t see.
इतने बड़े बड़े आर्टिस्ट हैं इतने बड़े बड़े आर्टिस्ट हैं और बिल्कुल ग़रीब.
There are so many big artists, so many big artists and very poor.
जब समझ आएगी तब आएगी समझ. की हम सब एक हैं कIहे के लिए झगड़ा कIहे के लिए. तो आप सहज को समझ लिजिये.
When there is understanding then there will be understanding. That we all are one for what to fight for. So you understand Sahaj.
ये तो सब वली बैठे हैं आपके सामने. और आप भी वली हो गए अब.
All of them are sitting in front of you. And you have also become one now.
आपके भी तो हाथ में ठंडक अराही है. देखिए बच्चो से पूचिये. हाथ हमारी और करो बेटा. देखो ऐसे दोनो हाथ करो. दोनो हाथ ऐसे.
You also have coolness in your hands. See, ask the children. Do your hands like this, son. Look, do both hands like this. Both hands like this.
हमारी और. ऐसे हाथ करिए. दोनो दोनो हाथ. आरही है ठंडक? आरही है ना.
Towards me. Keep hands like this. Both hands. Is it getting cold? Isn’t it?
ये तो पार ही पैदा हुए हैं. आप देखिए आपके भी अराही  है. आपके  तो आ ही रहे थे पहले भी. आपके आरही हैं बेटा?
They are born realised. You see, you also are feeling it. For you it was coming earlier also. Coming son?
इनके तो खूब ज़ोरों में. और यहाँ पर भी सर से भी निकल रहा है. ठंडक सिर से निकल रहा है.
They are very strong. And here also it is coming out of the head. Coldness is coming out of the head.
यही है इसे ही कहते हैं. यही रूह है. इसिको चैतन्य कहते हैं. कोई रूह कहे चाहे चैत्न्य है तो वही चीज़.
That’s what it’s called. This is the “Ruh”. This is called “Chaitanya”. Whether you call it “Ruh” or  “Chaitanya”, it is the same thing.
So now he is in our family.
आपको हर देश में रिश्तेदार मिलेंगे. हर देश में, जहाँ भी आप पहुच जाइए.
You will find relatives in every country. In every country, wherever you reach.
माताजी गुलज़ार साहब भी आपकी फॅमिली में हो गए हैं. गुलज़ार साहब भी आए हुए हैं.
Mataji Gulzar Sahab has also become in your family. Gulzar Sahab has also come.
गुलज़ार साहब मुझे भूल गए. मैं आपसे मिल चुकी हूँ आपको याद है क्या?
Gulzar Sahab forgot me. I have met you, do you remember?
पूछिए. नही होगा.
I had come with Shastriji.
मैं शास्त्री जी के साथ आई थी. आपके यहा conference हुई थी ना youth उसकी मीना कुमारी जी थीं, दिलीप कुमार थे.
You had a youth conference, Meena Kumari ji was there, Dilip Kumar was there.
सब लोग आप भी उसमे तशरीफ़ लाए थे.
Everyone, you also came there.
ये तो कमाल के आर्टिस्ट हैं ये गुलज़ार साहब. क्या लिखते हैं. मैने यही पूछा ये वही गुलज़ार हैं.
Gulzar Sahab is an amazing artist. He writes so well! This is what I asked, is this the same Gulzar Sahab?
मैने आप मैं मिल चुकी हूँ आपसे पहले आप शायद भूल गए होंगे मुझे.
I have met you before, you might have forgotten me.
मैं भूलती नही एक बार किसी को मिलने के बाद.
I do not forget after meeting someone once.
आप भी इसमे समाइए. आप बहुत इसके लिए. जानना चाहिये कि इसके लायक आप हैं बहुत.
You are very worthy of it.
गुलज़ार साहब में बहुत कला है बहुत कला है. इसको पाते ही देखिए चमक जाएँगे.
There is a lot of art in Gulzar Sahab, there is a lot of art. See, you will shine as soon as you get it.
खुश रहिए.
Stay happy.
साहब बहुत बहुत धन्यवाद. आप लोग वापस जाइएएगा मुंबई?
Thank you very much. Will you go back to Mumbai?
जी हाँ.
Yes.
कब जा रहे हैं वापस ? खाना वाना खाया की नही? [Unclear]
When are you going back? Did you eat or not?
मैं भी खाना नही खाती जब तक किसी का प्रोग्राम होता है. [Unclear]
I also do not eat food until someone has a programme.